---
title: 'Stories in New Media: Post-Structural Ramblings'
date: 2017-11-27
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-11/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---

After looking at the “Snowfall” story in the *New York Times*, as well as *The Guardian’s* “NSA Files Decoded”, I was struck by the disrupting nature of the story-telling possibilities brought on by *New Media*. There is something very disjunctive about these new media *assemblages*, something that at first I thought was somewhat fad-ish but upon further examination and perusal, I find compelling. The past few weeks of this course, I have been very hung up on the logo-centric nature of text and writings, its linearity, the coolness of the medium *ala* McLuhan, but also its dominant meta-narrative in the manner of Lyotard, the authority of the “despotic eye” *qua* Deleuze and Guattari, the all-consuming structure of “writing” *qua* Derrida. While this last sentence can be read as me just trying to fit as many references to post-structuralist thought as possible to display a certain level of cultural capital, I cannot get over the way in which digital methods in the humanities really provides these post-structural and post-modern divides and claims of knowledge a tangible reality as opposed to an obscure abstraction which struggles against critiquing its own method of expression, namely modernist writing and linearity. The writings we read at the beginning of the semester dealing with the discontinuity of digital forms at first seemed to me like a complication, to a certain extent, of the knowledge and representation process, useful for generating new hypotheses and ways of seeing data and phenomena, a useful heuristic but ultimately just a tool for creating more logo-centric knowledge, ending in academic articles. These articles extolled the virtues of creating online exhibits, open-ended and ever changing, but it seemed a little gimmicky to me, too focused on user experience; however, when confronting the products of these digital forms week after week and seeing how they can be used, I have started to see in these tools something quite liberatory, liberatory from the frame of authority and centrality provided within the official realm of knowledge production. In my blog post dealing with Networks, I commented on how digital methods allowed us to use a prism when looking at any given phenomenon, multiplying the forms and representations we have of it, giving as an overall more total understanding of whatever we are looking at. 

In that post, I did not necessarily see how these refracted representations could be put together to gain more understanding more than adding more numerical instances to observe. After looking at how New Media handles story-telling however, I can see how these different forms can be used in unison in a way that both confirms and denies any form of centrality or intent. In the Snow Fall story as well as the NSA Files Decoded story, text and its linearity still played a function but were accompanied by other forms of digital media including photo galleries, videos, profiles, infographics, topographic maps, etc. If you were just reading the text you would be provided a very straight forward account of an avalanche which would tell you about the people involved, who arrived on the mountain as part of a back-trail skiing trip at the wrong time and went through an avalanche. While nothing in this story would be factually incorrect, all the pieces would be connected in the linear form of the text, which presents a bounded authority, one that if presented in a newspaper would not go beyond the print in the column. The story would be read and finished, presented in its entirety and left consumer. When this text is confronted on the web page with videos of the skiers who survived the avalanche, along with topographic info about where this story is happening, with pictures of the mountain in the past, mixed with video documenting the cultural sub-group of back-country skiers, with photo-galleries showing these individuals growing up skiing, with video of meteorologists explain how avalanches occur, with computer image models of what the avalanche condition in this peak must have looked like, followed with a picture and commentary strewn narrative of the ill-fated expedition that was to meet this avalanche, you are confronted with a rhizomatic telescoping of inputs and levels of discourse and representation. 

All of these things are happening simultaneously which build on each other, as well as challenge and show the limitations inherent in each representation. The text works to frame a scene, skiers caught in an avalanche happening somewhere. This scene is what we are normally provided in story-telling, an experience that captures a liminal moment, in which things unfold. What the digital forms provide, when interspersed throughout the text is the context, but context given in a way over and above anything text alone is capable. We see not only the representation of an event, but the elaboration of the structures and hidden movements of disconcerted and random actions and occurrences that built up to the perfect confluence of this ill-fated disaster. We telescope into the past of the lives of each individual skier presented, able to see at least the contours of the path that led them to this moment, mixed with an representation of the culture that created and guided these skiers to this pass at this time, mixed with the structural fixers that activated this pass as a place to go, given a history of how this pass came to be in its current form, with a lesson on the weather conditions that created the moment of the avalanche. Each representation reveals to us the hidden structure and dynamics that produced this particular historical moment and expression. And these hidden structures are only knowable after the fact, after the fact of “writing” (the event) that makes them legible and visible, a discursive move forward that drives us backward, which then again drives us forward. This may be coming off as erudite mumbo-jumbo, but this eems to me to be the crux of what post-structuralist and post-modern authors are discussing in terms of deconstruction, of revealing the structures and frameworks that impinge on us at every moment but only reveal themselves through disjuncture, a disjuncture that then breaks the rules of the game driving it forward, creating new rules. 

I guess I just think that digital humanities creates the a tangible representation of the schools of thought that haunted the 1970’s, the diagnosis of crisis in knowledge and representation, but provides a form in which this crisis can be explored but also experimented and played with, building on what we know and transforming it. Again, this might all be mumbo-jumbo, but it is something I have felt building the more I read and explore this area of thought and practice.         
