---
title: 'DPLA Photographs, an Exploration of Top Hats in Cultural and Historic Context'
date: 2017-09-22
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-3/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---
[The DPLA's Collection of Top Hats](https://dp.la/search?q=top+hats&utf8=%E2%9C%93)

For this explanatory work set, I have chosen to investigate and explore the DPLA's collection of images related to "top hats". 

Such a query, when put into the search bar of the DPLA images webpage, yields a collection of 2,160 images coming from 120 contributing institutions. The subjects of this "query" collection are given as "hats", "portraits", "men", "people", and "headgear". The location of these images is given in descending order of frequency: California, United States, New Jersey, Los Angeles, Orange County (N.J). The majority of these images are presented in English with very few exceptions. Most of these images were contributed by the New York Public Library, the California Historical Society, the National Portrait Gallery, Claremont Colleges Library, and the Los Angeles Public Library. 

When one clicks on the maps display tab, the website shows us where each of these images came from within the United States. The majority of these images came from California, New York/New Jersey, and Texas. It makes sense that these three areas are the three largest sources of these images due to them holding some of the Nation's largest cities, and as a result a large amount of documentation occurred in these areas and became centrally stored. This is in keeping with Putnam's point that not all objects are being digitized equally, that those in colonial empires, just like the records kept in centralized imperial centers, hold the most sway. This can be said of major cities in the US, dominating the scope of what was kept and recorded. 

When one clicks on the timeline display tab, we see images of top hats (in this collection) started to appear in 1640 with two sketches of men in top hats, the image itself from Italy, undergoing many increases and declines in frequency up until the present in 2017 with a bunch of materials not seemingly connected to top hats such as economic snapshots and reports. It seems many of the images that existed before the camera, comprised mainly of drawings, had their places in books, reports, journals, all official looking documents capturing some kind of authoritative stance over the subject matter. The images taken since the camera are more candid and taken by the individuals wearing the hats. 

From looking at this collection of images, I was struck at the cultural life that top hats have had throughout history. In the earlier images, we see top hats as worn by rich lords, a class symbol, that seemed to function both within societies as well as between them, acting as a fashion demarcating class and distinction above others. We also see top hats used by voluntary fire organizations in the 18th century, used to mark its members during times of crisis, as part of a uniform of service. As we progress through time, we see the top hat being worn by more and more diverse groups of people, passing from representation in drawings to photographs. The class distinction seems to last for a long time, up until around the end of the 19th century, when it is taken up by Vaudevillians and Flappers. We see the top hat being taken by counter-culture groups, rearticulated and put to different purposes. This taking up of the top hat probably served a diverse set of functions for those wearing the during this period, some wearing it to gain legitimacy and garner respect from social elites; others probably wore the hat to poke fun at and undermine the legitimacy of these class distinctions, of the function of top hats as designating elite status, especially Vaudevillians who committed acts of buffoonery for entertainment and social critique. The same can be said of the flappers, inverting gender and class roles, hacking and making fun of these distinctions. After this period, the top hat seemed to undergo a disembedding from any rigid cultural and social function, becoming employed in a multitude of functions and worn by a variety of individuals. It entered the realm of theatre and costume, of high end fashion, and of counter culture while having its place as a marker of the upper-class dissolve. 

If I were to put together a collection of these photos, I would seek to capture this cultural life of the top hat that I described above, pulling together the photos that tell this story. I would be limited by the fact that most of these images come from the same institutions as well as three totalic geographic locations. It would be hard to draw together any sort of causal transmission of one use to the other. At least it would either be an amorphous aspatial history of top hats throughout the ages, or a history of top hats in each geographic area (city) that produced them. We would be able to see dominant trends, but any use not conforming to broader trends exhibited in these areas would appear to be an outlier, or at the very least so singular as to put into question whether this was a significant employment of the top hat or not. It would probably be best to create a few bucket categories, that are more periodized and function oriented than perfectly historical and causal, to gather these images together, showing variation as opposed to necessarily evolution. Evolution can be inferred and generally posited but not necessarily proved to a satisfactory condition.

