---
title: 'Auteurs or UX Designers? : The Impact of Digital Technologies on the Form of History'
date: 2017-11-13
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---

I find myself very conflicted when considering the rupture opened up by digital technologies on the form and presentation of knowledge. While I am all for expanded access to knowledge and sources, and the decentering of centralized dominant narratives, the language of interactivity, the user, engaging new audiences, content creators, etc., smack of commodified, corporate, start-up language. These terms and set of concerns seem to fall more in the domain of the UX (User Experience) Designer than they do that of historian or knowledge producer. I feel that this rupture introduced by digital technologies on the delivery and form in which knowledge is being distributed is both an advance and a tragedy depending on where you are looking, and at which sensibilities you hold when entering this shifting arena.   

The introduction of digital technologies both into museums as well as the movement of content distribution and display moving to the internet has led to the rampant decentering of academic and intellectual prose and display. In past weeks, we have read pieces that valorize the shift towards the web’s non-linear format, that break from the linear logo-centric logic of the book, with its singular authoritative and unassailable voice. In this week’s readings, Wyman on *Digital Storytelling in Museums* and Leon on *Doing Public History in Digital Environments*, it is exceedingly clear that the logo-centric form that history has taken up to this point, in form of the journal article, the book, and even the museum exhibit, has been unquestionably shaken. Before these new technologies entered the field, this professionalized logo-centric form of knowledge production dominated the process and course by which any type of knowledge product was produced, a track and technique that dictated how the project was to be structured and presented. Like the way David Foster Wallace talks about life being the water we swim around in, that thing that is so ever present we do not even realize it’s there, a topic to discuss, the form of professional knowledge production hung all around us, channeling everything we did, disallowing the envisioning of other possibilities for knowledge production and presentation. Here we had the content creator as a technician, as responsible for creating a specialized section of a product under constraints of modernism’s universal mass product. What the introduction of digital technologies did was reopen the question of form, to ask not how do we turn our content into the pre-determined forms available to us, but what would be the best way to structure and present this specific piece of content. From this perspective, we are seeing the introduction of a post-modern moment similar to that of the post-modern moment in art, with form becoming a preoccupation and subject for study and experimentation in itself. With the number of available forms for knowledge production and exhibition proliferating, different questions are being asked, which require different skill sets and sentimentalities. We have the introduction of more aesthetic, experience oriented design being incorporated into exhibition, with the focus on the uniqueness and distinctiveness of an experience. What we have here is the emergence of the auteur, the content creator as one trying to craft a masterful and one of a kind experience which makes full use and consideration of all forms to determine how best to tell any given story. Here we have the concern with multiple media, the bricolage and overlaying of several forms to produce the composite multi-dimensional display of the unique content.

From the perspective of the rupture and proliferation of knowledge production forms, we are seeing a unique moment, a shift from technician sensibilities to those of the auteur. However, if we are to consider this introduction of digital technologies from the perspective of the creators as opposed to that of the overall field in which they work, we can see the opposite result. If we consider the new concerns that are being brought to the table by the introduction of digital technologies into the realm of knowledge presentation, there is an overall emphasis on the user, on interactivity, on new audiences, on the ways in which to maximize the viewership of any given exhibition or knowledge form. While both the Wyman and Leon pieces show a strong focus on the more substantial concerns for the appropriateness of form for content, more the concerns of the auteur, it is unavoidable that these concerns also bump up against the concerns of museums and knowledge producing institutions as businesses, with their own vested financial interests. This decentering of the form of history and knowledge presentation can lead to auteur moments from those leading this charge, for the rest of the field it introduces a new series of constraints that are fundamentally at odds with the form history took before. Once we have the introduction of the focus of any given knowledge product being centered around an individual user, around driving whatever project is being produced to be seen and appreciated by the largest overall audience, we have the erosion of some sort of separation between the work of an expert being produced for the love of the material and content itself and that of the product as a commodity, produced for the mass consumption of an audience. It is from this perspective that we could see this moment as having the opposite effect of the one described above, seeing the loss of the auteur sentimentality and the arrival of that of the technician, of the UX Designer. We have a shift away from the private work and labor of an intellectual and knowledge producer, who though they have the form of their products dictated from above, nonetheless they have the agency to produce whatever they want within this form, regardless of public consumption. What I worry about in this turn to the user experience is that intellectual products will become evaluated on how popular they are with the public, with how many people consume them. This seems like this type of evaluation and reasoning could really take hold, with the commodification of everything currently underway, then we would let the object’s value on a market determine its value and define what types of research should be pursued. In this model, I see it as very likely that knowledge production would become a lot more like big-budget tent-pole movies, attempting to appeal to broad audiences which then leads to an erosion of the integrity and individuality of the content or work that was to be presented. Here, I see the turn away from the auteur towards the technician, towards the corporate team whose UX Designer and Project manager begin calling the shots, whose desire for marketability drives the process and final product produced, as opposed to the content itself.   

Both of these perspectives obviously consider this moment, this turn, at its extremes, but also as two dynamics that are brought about by this turn that are in competition, the strength of either one winning out in different projects. Like anything else, this turn and decentering of turn is neither patently good or bad, but completely dependent on the context of any given project, and the perspective of any given producer within a larger system of knowledge production. We have to keep both the sentimentalities of the auteur and the UX Designer in mind when we approach our future projects, as well as the limitations and liabilities of each.  

