---
title: 'Scholarly Publishing in the Age of Digital Media'
date: 2017-12-04
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-12/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---

How does the scholarly community begin to confront the vast cleavage opened up in the representation and presentation of knowledge ushered in by the emergence of digital media? How much of what we deem to be scholarly knowledge and practice is tied up within the forms and norms of presentation adhering in the technology and media of the book and monograph? How much does scholarly communication and dialogue depend on a rigid format, universal standard of presentation, and pre-existing models of production? Does a discipline loose itself when it produces something other than its hallmark scholarly product? How much is what we refer to as knowledge is determined by the institutional and social arrangements of its creation? What is the best route for displaying and representing the knowledge being produced? Where is the line between knowledge and experimentation? 

These are all the questions and issues at stake when considering how a digital media product can be a scholarly work, which brings with it a sharpening focus as to the fields that shape and make knowledge distributable and readable. What we encounter with the emergence of any new media, as proselytized to us by Marshall McLuhan, is an environment of blurriness and disjuncture, where the new media breaks with all the forms that came before it. In this ruptured space, the norms of creation are anomic, non-existent, and the previous dominant mediums see themselves both simultaneously reflected and eclipsed by the new media. This opens up a site of crisis and confrontation for the old media, and all the products, institutions, and individuals produced by and caught up within it.

In this week’s readings on the scholarly work meeting the digital age, it became very clear that what the digital media put at stake was the very status of what can be considered a “scholarly” work. We saw in the Thomas essay *Writing a Digital History Journal Article from Scratch: An Account* an overview of the process by which Thomas and Ayers went about creating an invited scholarly work that was to be digitally born. The piece confronts all the questions asked above, and attempted to experiment with the novel forms brought to the table by the digital media, and attempted to frame the project around the technology that would best tell the story they were trying to tell. They chronicle the multiple iterations their project went through, relying first on a networked, non-linear, graphical interface that presented component pieces of evidence, historiography, analysis, etc. layered and navigable through a branching network of associations. When they sent this iteration of the project out to their workshop and reviewers, they received many skeptical critiques that questioned what the argument of their piece was, citing the confusion that such an interface brings with it in reading, and clearly non-comprehending critiques that the digital piece added nothing but a gimmick to the presentation of this narrative. This caused the authors to reckon with the fact that the rupture and area of experimentation they were entering into was not free and unbounded in all the ways they had hoped, that they would have to present whatever they created against the already defined and institutionalized norms of the logo-centric discipline of history, and of knowledge production as a socio-historic practice within its own institutions and serving its own greater overall to the social system. The authors ended up creating a more toned down version of their project, with more conventionally structured text pages. This piece, while not as radical and exploratory as initially conceived, has been largely successful in the field, with large amounts of citations and inclusion on syllabi. 

I think this case begs the question of how, and to what extent, do new creations in this space opened up by the new media have to reckon with the past institutions that served as the gate-keepers and authorities on what constitutes “knowledge” proper. This is a point brought up by Dan Cohen in his blog *The Social Contract of Scholarly Publishing*. Cohen takes a somewhat different tact, talking about how most of our focus has been on the supply side of scholarly creation when considering the move to digital publishing; what Cohen brings to the table is shifting the focus to the demand side, in this instance into what the reader or audience expects of the work of scholarly production. He asks what the scholarly product is supposed to be, what expectations and assumptions have been set that guide and inform a reader, that ask of the reader a serious engagement, with a particular type of reading taking place. 

This point brings us to the question of whether a scholarly product is indeed a rigid product, one defined by a pre-given set of assumption and expectations grounding its production and presentation. Does a scholarly work, by definition, adhere to an almost universal and rigid framework, that what is scholarly about a work that it copies the format of all other scholarly works and is thereby put into conversation, goes through the same process of vetting and creation, signifies a confirmation of the institutions and social/economic/political conditions under which “knowledge” is to be understood? Does the advent of a field of experimentation opened up by digital media, with its lack of a standard norm or structure for knowledge product creation, present itself as a threat to this very authoritative endeavor of scholarly knowledge production? Is it a question of whether the digital media has to adopt the conventions of the media used by the scholarly institutions that existed before it, or whether the digital media needs to develop its own rigid and unique replicable structure and norm of scholarly presentation that others will follow? 

Here the boundaries and struggles between what constitutes scholarly knowledge and what lies outside of it in the field of experimentation remains blurry, vague, ill-defined, and indistinct. I suppose I am more comfortable in this hazy boundary, within the realm of experimentation that gets around and asks us to rethink and redefine the standards by which we produce representations of this world. I personally think that we should let whatever story we are trying to tell, or representation we are trying to produce, dictate the format that we are trying to display it in, that we should be experimenting and breaking the boundaries of what is permissible with each new product we create. I personally think that Thomas and Ayer’s first attempt at their project, anchored around the graphic interface, was much more interesting than the final version they created, the web like and visual structure and interface of it much more fitting with the type of knowledge and experience they were looking to create. Especially when juxtaposed with Ayers’ digital archive of the south, whose interface was both useful in centralizing all sorts of disparate data, but also in presenting us with an unbounded phenomenon, like a sphere that we cannot see all of that we continually turn over and over to see the other side, which changes our view of the object as a whole. I think that the interface presented in the Writing a Digital Article from Scratch Piece, of the branching color coded nodes, was fascinating and the model to strive for. Even the reading record display in the *Differences Slavery Made* digital piece more opened up the possibilities of the medium. 

I guess at the end of the day we need some type of standard for the continuation of a discipline, and realm of knowledge, if you subscribe to a positivist bent. However, I believe that any time that we are presented with a way to break from what is, to experiment and conceive anew the varieties of forms that our work can take, and grapple with the very real questions of what is knowledge and who are we to produce it, what structure of authority are we creating, that we need to take it. As for the question of will people be able to read it, will they take the time to learn the nuances of each new creation, to adapt themselves to the challenge, I can only say that some will, and as we have generational shifts in which more and more readers grew up on digital media, the barriers to readership will greatly decline, the more we will have readers who demand that the world of scholarly production keep up with the forms and media that are penetrating and shaping our lives.             

...

Post-Script

I just want to comment and mark out here that I am intrigued by the idea of components, of self-contained and non-repeated fragments of information, as a new style in which to present knowledge. I think that there is something that is lost when forced to write in a linear and traditional fashion, in the form of a monograph where all parts must fit one another, where a continuity and consistency must be maintained. I feel like components allow you to let contradictions appear in a way that acknowledges the dialectical nature of truth. I think they also allow you to do justice to each fragment of information, keeping it a self-contained piece that does justice to itself. I want to read and write more about this subject somewhere else as I think it holds a lot of potential. 
