---
title: 'Data and Digital Methods as a Heuristic'
date: 2017-10-02
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-6/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---
Gitelman and Jackson’s introduction to the collection *Raw Data is an Oxymoron* starts the task of considering the historical origins of data as a concept and as a ubiquitous modern *thing* that surrounds us. Data is often thought of as existing independent of any author, as Gitelman and Jackson describe, objective, neutral, existing before any type of analysis or interpretation. What these authors attempt to do is show how these assumptions about what data is, are themselves historically constructed, that even our idea of objectivity that we apply to data is itself a product of our time and age. This is an ever important reminder in this age of big data, where every click on the internet creates a new piece of data to be accessed later, where we just accept data as it is, at face value, believing that if it exists it is absolutely objective and true. 

Data, however, is anything but objective, being the product of subjective beings, created and gathered (even in the case of sensor recorded data) by human-made constructs. For data to be exist, the parameters of its measurement have to be set by someone, their particular purposes for data collection, as well as their socio-historical positionality, forever leaving its mark on the data produced. This is not a nihilistic deconstruction of data, as much as it is a call to remind ourselves that the uses of data are themselves limited, that just because we have large pools of data and complex digital methods to make sense of this data does not mean that we have finally and forever shut the book on knowing phenomena. On the contrary, the digitization of knowledge, the quantification and data-tization of the world has not closed the book on old ways of knowing and of interpreting. This assumption that data will provide the final word on the state of knowledge, that it is the only way to make sense of the world, has been shown to be flawed on many occasions. This is most remarkably shown in the example of Fogel and Engerman’s *Time on the Cross*, a manifesto of cliometrics. Cliometrics can best be understood as a set of quantitative historical methods seeking to reveal the truth of any given age, giving generalizability that will cut through the limitations and warpings of subjective qualitative data. Cliometrics, especially as purported by these authors, was meant to really tell us about history, to prove all our previous assumptions about slavery wrong, ushering in a new age under which reliance of qualitative work would be a thing of the past, an error righted, or at the very least a technique and source relegated to hypothesis generation, not testing. 

After a short period of 18 months, the champion and game changing nature of this book were shown to be short-lived, after it was scoured over by professional in the field, most of the inferences made from the available data being indefensible, the subjective constraints and decisions made by the authors ultimately clouding the usefulness of the data. What this case showed was that the data by itself was useless, or tells us nothing, until it is framed properly, reconfigured to answer the question at hand. It is not that the data could not tell us things we did not already know, but the way it was employed was insufficient to bolster the broad and discipline-shaking claims made by the authors. The true flaw in this undertaking was the purpose that the authors brought with them to the data and the project, to fundamentally undermine the field of history and to provide it a new horizon, to make cliometrics speak louder that the rest of the discipline, attempting to prove all the wisdom in that field thus far (specifically in the history of slavery) wrong. It attempted to create a binary of knowledge, going with the objective data vs subjective anecdote divide exposed by Gitelman and Jackson, where it not only was not necessary but is not possible to draw. 

The question then becomes, what should be done with data, to what end should digital methods be put if they are not definitive, if they are not as completely revolutionary and re-centering as propounded? This where Gibbs & Owens come in with their piece on the *Hermeneutics of Data and Historical Writing* where they take the tact that digital methods and data should be used to explore possible alternatives to what we already know, to open up a space of experimentation and exploration. They take the position that data is only as good as its ability to bolster, inform, or add to a research question, that it cannot be considered as separate from the discipline of history but as an aid. Data then should be used as a heuristic, to consider other possibilities and directions to take one’s research. Providing historians with new information that can aid their research as opposed to replace it. They further extoll the necessity of researches keeping diligent records of the methods they employ, making it so the constructs that assembled and worked over the data can be reproduced, but also investigated by other researchers in order to determine the extent to which the data itself can be trusted. The point then is more that we need to be able to see the subjective in the data, to destroy the aura of rawness associated with it, and only then can we really understand how to use it. 

This is a point further propounded in the Ruggles piece on Family Structure where the author builds multiple models using different sources of data, trying to produce as many alternative ways of using the data available to him as possible. It is through the creation of multiple models that Ruggles reopens the question fo whether nuclear families have been a consistent trend throughout history, the revisionist hypothesis, or whether it is a recent trend. The multiple models produced tell us various stories that show that the nuclear family has gone through many phases and shifts, but that it is an increasingly modern phenomenon. What the models don’t tell us is why, that is still something left open to interpretation, but the creation of many competing and conflicting models gives the historian, the sociologist, the social scientist new grounds for interpretation that did not exist before. By pairing these models with other accounts of the phenomenon, new space has been opened for further research. Ruggles is careful to concede that most of his models are not definitive, even showing how many of them are constructed around subjectively determined constraints and rules, used more to flesh out ideas than to settle any issue.

All in all, digital methods and data are not an end in themselves, not the final word on the state of human knowledge and the world, but a new tool to be used in complement of existing research styles and methods. Data is not and should not be thought of as raw, but as a heuristic for exploring and shifting research questions, of providing new ways of seeing phenomenon that hopefully also shift our understandings with it. 
