---
title: 'Digitization as a practical endeavor (still in progress)'
date: 2017-09-22
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---
The Digital Medium, Simulacra, and the Reciprocity of Mediums
--------------------------------------------------------------

Putnam’s piece on The Transnational and Text Searchable seems to pick up on some arguments made in class last week regarding whether the internet (the digital) itself is a new medium, in Marshall McLuhan’s sense of the word. There were arguments in both the negative and the affirmative. Those speaking in the negative were saying that the internet merely made the products of all other mediums accessible and it itself did not constitute a medium. There were also those who argued that the internet itself cannot be regarded as a new medium, but as a collection of a variety of new digital mediums, each with their own specific forms and contents. Those in the affirmative argued that the internet was a new medium, that it contained all the past mediums while at the same time changing and redirecting their content, bringing with it new logics and ways of interacting and relating to the world. I argued on the side of the affirmative, that the internet itself, the digital, was a new medium; I did so on the grounds that while one could have accessed all of the same sources in their physical form that one accesses on the computer, the experience of doing so is fundamentally different. I argued that the nature of all of these things being digitally accessible exponentially condensed the process by which anyone could read and move between these sources. I used the example of getting lost in a Wikipedia loop, going to a wikipedia page and clicking one of the links to another page embedded in this page, and then doing the same on this next page, proceeding aimlessly, and stumbling upon all sorts of information you had not intended on finding, all in the span of a few minutes. I argued that this type of experience was fundamentally different from the process of tracking down physical sources, even within an encyclopedia, a process inherently linear, one forced to be more focused and intentional, also taking much more time. The internet, however, provides one with a much more decentralized and non-linear process of discovery, all accomplished in a different manner of practice, having its own form different from that of other mediums.

This is much the point that Putnam makes, both countering those who don’t believe the internet to be a medium, as well as schooling those who only think that the sophisticated digital tools and methods used by text-miners and the like use constitute new mediums. By focusing simply on the search bar, and the way that the digitized sources are accessed, Putnam is able to show that the very everyday practices historians use, that they do not recognize as a transformation in their practice, are revolutionary. This point furthers the debate depicted above, showing how the digitization of sources, the search bar, and text-searchability have led to incredible jumps in how we access knowledge and relate it to the world. Text-searchability has made it possible to go beyond the indexing work does by scholars, restricted to main figures and themes, to discover parts of the text not formerly accessible through fishing, as well as for terms and themes that appeared across large swaths of documents but that would have been geographically isolated in different archives and locations. Thus, the digitized and text-searchable source is a fundamentally different document, the digital archive a fundamentally transformed medium. This harkens back to Walter Benjamin, who found the mechanical reproduction of art as leading to a loss of the aura, to the withering away of the traditional and closed systemic relations attached to the work of art, which allows it to be placed into new relations in ways unthinkable beforehand. At least in terms of digitization of past physical sources, these sources become freed from their geographic and place-bound relations, jumping to the digital plane which allows new forms of relations that can be brought to bear.

It echoes Jean Baudrillard’s concept of the simulacrum, a copy of something that did not exist before. Here we have a digitization of a physical source, this digitization however not a copy of the original physical source but something else completely. The space of the simulacrum, of the digital source, is also not that of the physical source. The physical source existed in geographic and historical place, within an embedded context, this context itself a fundamental element of the work which also made it interpretable. The digital source only exists in digital space, a plane of pure representation, amongst other digital sources, related through their text and the algorithms which allow them to come into relation with one another. Putnam argues that digitization brings with it the threat of a detachment of history from the world, a point she highlights in the increasing prevalence of research being produced by people on places they have never been to. She highlights this shift to desk work history, done on the digital plane, to show the loss of context, of embodied field work and acquaintance with the place being studied, which used to be a pre-requisite for historical work. She argues that this loss of context must be taken into consideration in the work of historians using digital sources, arguing that the area-knowledge inherent in the original physical sources revealed the macro structures which impinged on these sources and the topics and themes of one’s research. There has been interesting work done to try to recreate this geographical context of digital sources, work done to map where the source was produced, or the specific and particular areas that it represents and talks about. This is interesting in the sense that Putnam here can be seen to be making the case against Benjamin, that the aura is itself important and should not be abandoned in favor of the new medium and its possibilities, but that the two should reinforce one another, both their dynamics harnessed to push forward knowledge and research. This is in keeping with the points brought up in the Liu piece The Meaning of the Digital Humanities that we read last week, specifically in the example of the project that used a traditionally produced thesaurus, which charted historical additions of words over time, to maximize and check their digitally produced word clouds of related words produced through sheer text mining methods. It is the merging of the past and the future that should pave the way forward, the presence of each transforming the other reciprocally.  

The Politics of the Digital Medium
-----------------------------------
Using this weeks’ readings, I want to touch on the point Baran brought up last week, how do we politicize the digital humanities, not just aestheticize it? Putnam brings up the hidden politics of the world of digitized historical sources, bringing up the fact that most of the sources chosen for digitization have been in English and other Western languages, and primarily from the 18th and 19th centuries due to the advent of typeface and mass printing at the time, sources which are easier to digitize and make text-searchable. This point brings up the limits and constraints which act on those conducting history through the digital, framing what types of questions, which periods, and which geographic areas are open for study. Putnam argues that this trend is shifting as there has been a push to digitize and upload texts in a variety of languages and a mass effort to put Qing dynasty era documents up from China, which will make more histories available for interpretation. This, however, does seem to be re-integrating the empire and nation-state boundaries and dynamics that Putnam found to be disappearing as a result of digitization and algorithmic search. Or rather, it reveals that structural dynamics still exist and have an effect, something that algorithmic search hides, just as it melts away the contexts in which different sources lived and existed prior to digitization. This requires a constant reminder for historians to always look beyond the digital sources they gather, to work to build context around where and when these sources existed, and as a result to identify the gatekeepers and structures which impinge on the actors they are studying as well as with the data they are working with (i). All of this brings up the politics inherent in digitization, at least bringing up the potential political claims that could be leveraged on the digital plane, fights for representation and a plurality of sources, for a digitizing focus on sources that lay farther back than the era of mass print, outside of the languages of empire, and from marginalized areas of the globe. This is a politics of representation and distribution (ii). 

[The history of google books](https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/04/the-tragedy-of-google-books/523320) and the battles raged over the universal digital library chronicled by James Sommers bring to light another dimension of the politics inherent in the digital turn. Not necessarily providing particular claims that the digital humanities should leverage over the medium, so much as describing the political terrain that has developed as a result of the introduction of the digital medium as a disrupting infrastructure. Much of the drama produced by the google books project came as a result of the ways that the new medium as infrastructure completely transformed the structures of knowledge. Here we have a shift reminiscent of Benjamin’s loss of the aura, the whole collection of human knowledge now digitized and capable of being put into relation with itself in ways never before possible. This echoes the Marxist dialectic of the development of the forces of production butting up against the relations of production from the past mode of production, the key mechanism of social change in the Marxist framework. Here we have the development of the forces of information, of the new medium, butting up against the super structural relations put in place by the old media, namely of print, books, and the copyright speaking to this media at the time. Here we have the new classes and groups of the new digital media (google and the like) butting up against the rulers of the past media (book publishers, authors, and those operating under the former relations of production). In the case of the settlement aimed at in the class action lawsuit, we have the attempted synthesis of the demands of different classes, the classes of the former media having control of the government in the form of copy right infringement laws, using it against the would-be usurpers. We have the former classes consolidating themselves but also realizing the capital creating potential of the new medium, forcing google and the prophets of the new media into a negotiation, a coalition of a shifting ruling class. We can see these same types of compromise happening in the 18th Brumaire and throughout the history of bourgeois revolutions, alliances made that give the new usurpers a greater role in governance and production, while at the same time propping up the classes of old in this changed situation. We see here the same thing happening but at an institutional and legal class level. The superstructure here, still in the hands of the rulers of the previous medium, is leveraged to bring the purveyors of the new medium to heel, synthesizing demands of the shifted ruling elite to attempt to create a new structure all together. This case study provides us with a snapshot into how battles are being fought, classes formed, and how the dialectics of class struggle are playing out in the arena of the digitizing medium. It also helps us identify which actors are the most powerful and responsible for the current state of the digital medium, providing a strategic topographical map for identifying where to put political pressure, of where to leverage claims, and of what negotiations any pushes in this sphere of a seemingly apolitical nature will have to go through. It highlights that "hacking" is political, in that it changes the terms of the game and will lead to political fights there on out. If one can hack with the consciousness that it is political, they can look to create new forms and structures that force more powerful parties to negotiate.
--------------------------
i Such sources capture, in a varying and not always knowable mix, the priorities of those who organized the project and the priorities of those who recounted their lives. Either has the possibility to be a useful corrective to the researcher’s own convictions (Putnam, The Transnational and Text Searchable, Pg. 393). (Accessed digitally at [https://academic.oup.com/ahr/article/121/2/377/2581842/The-Transnational-and-the-Text-Searchable](https://academic.oup.com/ahr/article/121/2/377/2581842/The-Transnational-and-the-Text-Searchable)) 

ii Gazing at the past through the lens of the digitizable makes certain phenomena prominent and others less so, renders certain people vividly visible and others vanishingly less so. (Putnam, The Transnational and Text Searchable, Pg. 390)  (Accessed digitally at [https://academic.oup.com/ahr/article/121/2/377/2581842/The-Transnational-and-the-Text-Searchable](https://academic.oup.com/ahr/article/121/2/377/2581842/The-Transnational-and-the-Text-Searchable)) 

