---
title: 'Crowdsourcing - Transcribe Bentham'
date: 2017-10-16
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-7/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---

For the crowdsourcing part of this week’s work set, I chose to participate in University College London’s Transcribe Bentham Project. The project seeks to transcribe the accumulated writings and journal entries of famous English utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham. The University College London has the largest store of Bentham’s writings in existence; however many pieces of this collection appear in the form of hand-written notes and fragments, not in the form of complete and fully-prepared manuscripts. Faced with enormous amounts of fragmentary data and notes, it is hard to prioritize which pieces should be transcribed and digitized first, as it is not known what many of these journals contain. The project seeks to get around the issue of prioritizing which pieces to transcribe first by opening up the transcription process to the public, calling for the crowd-sourced transcription of all of these writing by volunteers who are willing to put the time in.

For this work set, I acted as one of these volunteers, working to transcribe some of these writings to add to the vast database and cornucopia of Bentham’s writings. Learning to transcribe was simple, with two video tutorials which showed firstly how to transcribe and add mark-up so the transcription can quickly become an accessible digital document, as well as a tutorial on encoding. Aside from purely transcribing hand-written work, one of the biggest additions in value you make as a volunteer is encoding the transcription, making it searchable by tagging the different concepts and arguments made in each transcribed piece, as well as the topics of each piece. The task of crowd-sourcing itself was relatively easy, though which piece you chose to transcribe had a large effect on whether the task was engaging or not, with some entries being so fragmentary, or mundane, that the importance of transcribing this particular piece was not something you could easily arrive at. Obviously the transcriptions themselves could give you a variety of quality, with the options of using mark-up language and encoding up to the discretion of the individual transcriber, with some better than others. However, the point of this crowd-sourcing project is to make a vast amount of work accessible and useable, with the mere transcription of these works being enough to make them useable; the mark-up and transcription are important but something that can be refined by project leaders later on.

Once the encoded piece is added to the larger database, these written fragments then are put into a different structural relation to Bentham’s whole corpus of work. Digitized, transcribed, and encoded, these fragmentary pieces, which were formerly unknown as to their content, can now be searched and related to other fragments and pieces of Bentham’s work through the use of digital tools, algorithms, and searches. It allows the whole corpus to become searchable and relatable in different ways than before. Instead of being stuck in its disconnected linearity within fragmented hand-written journals, all pieces relating to a particular search topic can be brought together, allowing a researcher to look at the history of one concept or topic within Bentham’s work, pulling from a variety of formal papers and informal notes and fragments of Bentham’s thought related to the topic over time. 

A historian could thus piece together the evolution and development of certain topics and ideas within a single thinker’s corpus over time, also showing the spaces in between major works where the concepts were in stages of exploration and elaboration. The use of this kind of data, made available through crowd-sourcing, can illuminate data that exists between the public and monolithic entries in Bentham’s work to illuminate a continuity, or discontinuity between these works, to show the space in which these ideas developed and changed, revealing the more creative and exploratory side of knowledge production, showing process as opposed to just result.

The data the project is gathering is worthwhile, if you are a Bentham historian or scholar, though the use to the general public is a little less clear or even a concern of the project in general. I do think, however, that this type of crowd-sourcing, and this type of project in general, is very helpful and useful for exploring the development of thought from a single thinker, being to incorporate all their dated notes and non-published material in order to make sense of their process as well as the historical development of their own ideas, especially if it is all just sitting there, overwhelming in size to the point where you don’t know what to do with it as one person.          

