---
title: 'Re-Embedding History: The Spatial Undergirding of Historical Evidence '
date: 2017-10-30
permalink: /posts/2017/09/blog-post-8/
tags:
  - images
  - category1
---

The arrival of digital geographic information systems (GIS) opens up with it a new opportunity to place historical accounts and facts where they existed and occurred. Unlike many of the other techniques and methods of digital history we have read about, the spatializing of historical documents and texts seems to me to not fundamentally challenge the practice of history, but to force it to pay attention to the spatial and material reality it exists in. Like the other digital history methods we have surveyed, GIS and spatializing history present historians with the opportunity to see their materials in a different way, to organize their information and pursue and develop new research hypotheses they could not have done before. Unlike these other techniques, however, the reliance on computing technologies does not transfer the realm and dynamics upon which findings are made away from the realm of historical documents to the intricacies of coding and complex and impersonal algorithms. What I mean by this is that, though the GIS programs are complex and intricate, they themselves are not allowing historians to see information that always undergirded their texts, not resorting to increasingly abstract methods operating on a different level of logic and organization. In fact, GIS increases the materiality of the materials in consideration.

To unpack this claim towards the increased materiality given to texts by spatial history, I want to bring in the claim made by Knowles’ introduction to *Placing History*, where she discusses the difference in the ways historians and geographers see the world. “[H]istory has been a logo-centric profession that privileges words and linear logic over images and our more synoptic apprehension of their content and meaning” (Pg. 2). This passage reminds me of the way that Marshall McLuhan talks about the ways in which different mediums privilege different senses and ways of apprehending the world. It would seems as though text, and linear reading has come to dominate the field of history, privileging one source of seeing (in Merleau-Ponty’s sense of apprehending) the world. This form of seeing, as with McLuhan, brings with a sort of totalizing abstraction, an imperializing medium that stamps its authority on the world in question, obfuscating and disqualifying other ways of seeing. While such a linear logic, text driven view of the world may be able to take the geographic and location based information of historical evidence into account, it’s very presentation takes these facts out of their embedded and materialized context, placing it within a “cold” abstract medium wherein the reader constructs their own mental representation of the space in which these actions occur. Our own lived and narrative experience however is always already pervaded with space, informed, conditioned, and determined by the ways that we move through space, by the spatial practices employed that bring with them a representation of historical events but also of the spaces we traverse themselves. It would seem as though a turn towards other forms of seeing, towards the visual and the spatial, and the geographic would re-convey this evidence in the form of a “hot” medium, where the information itself is given in its fuller more embedded form. Spatial history, thus, does not pose a threat to history itself but forces it to become aware of the very preconditions of its existence, to pay special attention to the material and spatial conditions of its production, and recover something lost by the turn to the totalic vision of the abstract text. 

It is not as though geographic location and spatial relations are something added post-facto historical evidence, but something always already present, something that has to be rediscovered to be seen. “Almost every historical document contains some kind of geographic information – where something took place, where someone was at a certain time, what life was like in a particular place, the spatial extent of an event or phenomenon, and so on. Only if one captures geographic information is geographic analysis possible…” (Knowles, *Placing History*, Pg.18). Like in Richard White’s piece *What is Spatial History?*, discussing James Scott’s *Seeing Like a State*, it is necessary for us to *see* the historical evidence we work with differently in order to realize the potential we have to make different forms of representations of space, in this instance in forms of GIS maps and visual representations of space. This requires that we look at our historical evidence through new eyes, asking different questions, looking for geographic information and spatial relationships that already exist within them that we could not have represented through the logo-centric linear nature of text., very similar to the way that Cameron Blevins talks about the new potentials of Trade Tables and Train Schedules lying within Texas newspapers in *Space, Nation, and the Triumph of Region*. 

Like the other digital methods we have discussed, the turn towards spatial history requires a certain playfulness, a certain willingness to screw around, to think differently, to imagine different contexts in which historical evidence can place itself in new relations. “[C]ultivating a spatial and visual imagination makes it easier to recognize the place-based information and spatial relationships embedded in historical evidence” (Knowles, *Placing History*, Pg. 18). The difference between spatial history methods, and those of other forms of digital history, lies in the fact that this spatial and visual imagination is not something newly created, something alien and untenable to the average person, but an expression of an imagination we already possess and use every day. The spatial imagination, the spatial representation of space is a mere outpouring if the tripartite dynamics of Lefebrve’s *social production of space*, with its corollary in imagined geographies. We are always already living spatially, moving spatially, representing space in our imaginations and minds, and to each other, and endowing space with meanings, living space. This can also be seen in work on cognitive maps, everyday geographies, city images, etc. The human association and relationship with space is a constitutive part of what it means to be alive, space going beyond a mere container in which our actions take place, and instead being a constitutive part of how we are and how we practice our lives. What spatial history does is bring us back to the ground, return to us the setting and particularity of our experiences, to place the qualifying boundaries and claims on our own experiences and the human produced evidence that we come into contact with through our research. Not only does spatial history give us the ability to re-materialize history, it brings back to us ways of seeing the summation and conditions of our experiences on a mass scale and over large swaths of time. It allows our imaginary geographies and our representations of space to leave the immediate level of embedded experience and to come into linkage and conversation with representations of space on a massive scale.   

